Well, good afternoon.
Welcome to the Social Services Community Select Committee.
Uh, thank you for being here this afternoon.
So, uh, what I might do is, uh, ask you
to introduce yourself and then, um,
make some opening comments, wish,
and then we'll move to questions from members.
Great. Thank you. Um, good afternoon everyone.
Uh, I'm John McKinnon
and, uh, chair of the Sport Integrity Commission.
Uh, Koto. I'm Rebecca, roll Chief Executive
of the Sport Integrity Commission.
Okay. Um, thank you Mr. Chair. Koto. Uh, good afternoon.
Members of the committee, um, uh,
sport Integrity Commission, t Kahu Rani, uh,
was established on the 1st of July, 2024.
So we are reviewing today our very first year of,
uh, operation.
To give you a very brief history,
the commission was established as I'm sure some
of you're aware, on, on the, on the back of
numerous reviews into primarily into sport.
Um, and, uh, those reviews had dealt
with some very serious wrongdoing.
Uh, and one
of the con constant themes emerging from those reviews was
the need for, uh, transparent, independent body free
of sport New Zealand, with the resources to help sport
and recreation, particularly when dealing
with difficult trauma related, uh, issues.
So that was our mandate.
Um, the integrity, sport
and recreation, uh, sorry, the Integrity Sport, uh,
commission Act was passed, uh, last, uh, in in 2024.
Our mandate is set by that legislation.
We deal with anti-doping, we deal
with competition manipulation.
We deal with participant protection,
which is very broadly defined
and includes bullying, harassment, discrimination, uh,
sexual misconduct.
We deal, deal with CHI children safeguarding,
and we deal with corruption and, uh, across the sector.
Uh, very briefly in terms of our first year look,
I'm delighted with the progress we have made.
Um, uh, uh, probably our number one achievement is
to launch our complaints
and dispute resolution service, um,
which is already fully up and running
and, um, probably somewhat sad to say, very busy,
uh, in our first year.
Um, and that provides a full ambit of, um, services, um,
through, with some very highly skilled
trauma informed operators.
Um, in April this year, we launched our integrity code,
which is sort of the second limb of our, of our being,
if you like, which sets minimum standards for the sector.
Uh, again, really delighted
with the feedback we're receiving around that.
Uh, and we've produced some really outstanding resources
for the sector, getting great feedback about how,
how helpful they have been.
And then very briefly, in terms of challenges, again, um,
look, we are very aware of the fiscal constraints, uh,
and we believe we can, uh, deliver on our objectives
for probably the next two years.
Um, it is fair to say that we do see a period
of time if those, if that fiscal envelope doesn't change,
where, where our demand will exceed our supply
or our ability to meet that demand.
But we think we're okay for the next two years.
Um, but if there is no change in that envelope,
then we will have to adjust our our offerings accordingly.
Um, so I just wanted to be clear about that.
The second thing is, um, we really need
to now convince our sports, uh,
and our recreational sector to adopt our code.
It's a voluntary, um, code. We don't impose it on people.
We're getting great feedback,
but it is quite an exercise for sports to adopt the code.
It takes a lot of work.
Um, so that's our big challenge,
I suppose, for the next 12 months.
Um, and then as we move down our pathway,
we really wanna move more
and more into our culture change education space, uh,
rather than just being the
ambulance at the foot of the cliff.
Um, so that's the journey we're on.
Um, all I wanted to say initially, um, Mr.
Chair, and obviously delighted sake, the questions great.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for coming today.
I suppose the obvious question is,
why is the code voluntary?
Uh, it's a great question.
The, uh, the sense that we had is that if somebody
believes, uh, believes in this, these principles,
they will adopt it and they'll adopt it
with a lot more passion and a lot more vigor than if it's
just de pot and imposed centrally.
So we have laws, obviously
that provides sort the minimum flaw of rights, if you like,
around discrimination, harassment.
We wanna take that one level higher,
and we thought still believe it's best if somebody comes
to this saying, this is right for my sport,
rather than I'm being made to do it.
Our fear then is that if it would just be a policy stuck in
a cupboard, if, if it's,
if it's forced on people, if they believe in it.
I mean, I, I think we'd all like to believe that,
but having, um, some experience in sport background,
you know, it, it might be simpler, people adopt
to policies if they have to.
And you're talking about culture change sometimes, you know,
just so that's just the comment really, I suppose.
So what is the uptake?
So the uptake at the moment is
we're, we're delighted with it.
So bear in mind it only came into giang 3, 3, 4 months ago.
So, so far we've had, um, scouts
as the largest recreation sector, uh, adopt the code.
Um, eSports adopt the code.
We have 15, 16 sports on well down the journey.
Rebecca May gimme the exact number.
Uh, and excellent feedback now from our major sports.
So rugby, football,
and cricket have all indicated a de
a determination to get there.
It does take a lot of, most sports would probably take 12
to 24 months from going.
We want to adopt to, we are now ready to adopt
because if you, if you can imagine our requirement,
because we cover high performance all the way to community,
if rugby is going to adopt the code, then every rugby club
has to have those policies in place.
But before rugby can say, we are, we are, we are on board,
it needs to be really confident it has
delivered at all levels.
And that's why perhaps you would actually be doing codes a
favor by making it mandatory so they don't have
to convince all these stakeholders, you know, and
because it's like a small parliament.
You've got all your, your, your, your clubs out there
and all that, their own their own ideas.
And so sometimes if it's just the playing policy,
it's come from the top, we've gotta do it.
It can actually be a support to codes,
especially if it's a code you believe in.
Look, I understand that. And I suppose it is now
the law that it's voluntary.
So we are required to follow the act as drafted.
Um, I mean, if, if we, if I may regret saying this,
but when I come back in 12 months time and,
and no one's taken it up, it's probably entitled,
you're entitled to probably, you know,
say, well, it's not working.
We we're, we are confident sports are saying we,
if you think about it from a sports perspective, the, the,
the real question is why wouldn't we?
And it's a really poor look for a sport
to say we are not prepared to commit to minimum standards
around discrimination, minimum standards around harassment.
So we think we'll get
Just a thank you, um, then I'll call you once.
So did you say the scouts say
There was scouts New Zealand? Yes. Yes.
Okay. My suppers to, um,
uh, be if, if
in the review, and I'm using your words wrongdoings, right?
Then that's, you know, that that's telling us something
that's over a a a sustained period of time.
Things screwed up and nobody took notice.
And then bang, now we're taking notice.
And now then, and as you set up the infrastructure
for this next shift, um, it seems a little bit light
in, in terms of the voluntary, because it's so wrong.
It was so wrong. We moved to this point
and we were like, we're taking this seriously,
and then we back off, we back up
and call it a voluntary thing.
How serious is serious then?
Because when you use words like a misconduct, uh,
harassment, bullying, um, sexual misconduct, when you,
you line all those up, we were just, we just passed a bill
and, or we were a debating about recently on stalking
and harassment that took years
for this country to wake up to that.
So when you, those words are showing up in this context.
Yeah, I, I don't know whether they're volunt Well,
it voluntary doesn't get us quite there.
Uh, my, that would be my view
and I'm just your, your response to that.
Look, as I said, history will, will partly be our judge.
Um, one thing I can say is I, I
History has already been our judge.
'cause that's how wrongdoings came to be.
Yeah, I mean it probably in terms of commission
and whether voluntary works, the one thing, uh, just
to bear in mind is that we do also have the ability
to launch investigations based on the public interest.
Mm. So whether or not you adopt the code, uh,
there is an overarching right?
Um, uh, for Rebecca
and her team to receive information which suggests whether
or not a sport is a a, a code adopter.
We are going to investigate this sport regardless if it's in
the public industry to do so.
So we have that backup. We also do have the ability
ultimately to work with Sport New Zealand to say, to a sport
that chooses not to adopt the code.
Ultimately, why are you funding the sport?
So, um, we have levers that we can use if we have to,
but we'd much rather talk themselves if
We can.
I want ask two supplementary, actually just one, one.
Can you just remind us how many have voluntarily started?
So only two at the moment, but that's which, which one?
An now view purely a timing issue.
Uh, bearing in mind, we only had the code come
in a few months ago. Mm-hmm.
So it's scouts and eSports
Scouts and eSports. Mm-hmm.
And then in terms of the, um, your, your complaints
and dispute resolution service that you've now launched, uh,
who is, is, what's the process
for a sport being part of that?
Can anyone complain from any sport or,
or it has to be ones who've signed over the code?
Correct. So at the moment, um,
we effectively adopted a previous, uh, system
that was in place and, and expanded it.
So at the moment, every sport has access to that.
There may come a time again in the future
where we ultimately say, if you want to be able
to access our complaints and dispute resolution service
and you still refuse to adopt the code,
will we make it available to you?
But at the moment, we want participants to be safe.
So we want all participants to be able
to access our system at the moment.
Uh, and after our first year, we were averaging
a formal complaint within scope per day, per working day.
So, um, there's plenty out there.
Just one. So, um, so bearing in mind
that you've only been in operation, well,
the code's only been this three or four months.
Yes. How, and you've only got, um,
scouts and eSports.
eSports. How are you knowing that they're there,
but how are you gonna evaluate?
How are you, how are you gonna see how well
that's working within those codes?
Do you want to Yeah, Absolutely.
Um, so first of all, I'd say, I think, as Dawn said,
irrespective of the code, we have the ability
to support any sport
and recreation organization through education,
uh, receiving complaints.
And, and, and we understand that culture
of integrity takes a long time to build.
And, and behavioral change does.
So to the point about the voluntary, um, that the,
the sector, if, if it had been mandatory upfront,
everyone probably would've been in breach
'cause they haven't had that time to
understand and make those changes.
However, uh, and I think you mentioned earlier, Dawn,
the legislation just due to be reviewed in 2028,
at which point that might be revisited.
So until then, we, uh, progress as, as we are now, uh, with
code adopters and, and signatories.
And we are able to, I guess if
what I think you're asking is assess the value of the code
with those organizations.
So yeah, through, uh, the interactions we have with them,
um, through feedback we get from them through uptake of our,
uh, education and our awareness raising, uh, collateral.
Um, and then I think for any agency who receives complaints,
if they go up, it's a, it'll sound perverse,
but it's a good thing because then, you know,
the awareness is higher and, um,
people feel safe and they know what to do.
So tho those are good indicators for us.
So, and, and just on that, so imagining you are sort of,
you're holding their hands
as they go through Yes, that's right.
Through the adoption of the code,
how well are you resourced,
assuming we want everyone mm-hmm.
To adopt the code, you're gonna hold a lot of hands
as we have that culture change.
How well resourced are you to do that?
How, and, and how are you anticipating that will change?
That's good. Do you mean to take that
Too? Yeah, you can
start. We have, uh, we difficult.
There's no doubt about that. Uh,
and we are very conscious that demand will increase
as more sports adopt the code
and more red sectors of organization adopt the code.
We, we can, we feel confident we can make it work
with the team we have, uh,
and the online resources we are developing for, as I said,
the next couple of years, there will come a point where we,
if, if, if the growth in complaints we expect
to continue continues, there will come a point
where we will need to sit down with the minister and,
and say, we, we are approaching a, a, a problem down,
but we are okay for the next two years.
Supplementary help.
Oh, hello Don. Hello.
Um, I wanted to know about, uh, fact
that you've got a whole lot of volunteers on these
organizations who are probably doing your best
and have been coming at things from period of angles.
How are you managing that
and what's the balance in terms of education versus
really serious harm that's being done?
Because as we know,
investigations can suck up a lot of resource.
Yeah, great question.
The, the, I think we see ourselves on
something of a, of a pathway.
So, um, the first two or three years, it's really crucial.
We get our core services right?
So that's when I talked about the
ambulance, really at the foot of the cliff.
So that means we need
to be well resourced when complaints come in.
We need to make sure victims have the support,
have the counseling available,
that our investigators are really well trained, et cetera.
So, um, doing our core role, right,
is our number one priority.
Um, and that includes also, you know, continuing
to doing a really strong job in the anti-doping space.
Yeah. So core job remains the focus
for the first two to three years.
We are producing great education resources,
but ultimately we will be successful when we get
to the point where we go, the core is lockdown,
we've got the sector on board, our policies are in place.
Now let's really start focusing more
and more on changing hearts
and minds, changing attitudes around what is
or isn't acceptable in coaching, for example.
And we are already doing some of that work,
and so is Sport New Zealand.
But, um, yeah, we are all excited by the day
where we can actually say the core is there.
Um, now let's start moving more into that culture shift.
But I, I do think it needs to be a progression.
If we start at that end,
we'll let people down who need our support.
Now,
New question, Warren. Thank
you. Um, can I turn to, um, complaints, resolution
and investigations part?
Um, so you said you've been unfortunately busy,
but is that, does that include maybe historic issues?
And this is maybe a wash up of a lot of that,
and do you expect that to taper off into the future?
Or is it that, sorry, I'll, I'll spit them all out at once,
but is that, um, so is this
because people are becoming more aware of integrity
and are coming forward,
and then how do you, how do you include in any data, um,
issues that might happen outside of your organization?
So I'm thinking, you know, particularly about the fraud
and breach of trust, which may go straight to the police
and you may not even be aware of that.
You capture any of that.
Yeah, yeah. Okay. I'll start.
I think it, you're talking about historic
matters Absolutely.
That form some of the complaints
we get and that's appropriate.
Um, and often
and more often than not, actually, they're linked
to current behavior as well.
So that, that, that can be a, a continuum
of, of a complaint.
And in many of our matters,
we get more than one complainant,
um, which won't surprise people.
Uh, but that, that captures anything up to this point.
Uh, for code signatories, only matter only breaches
of the code can be dealt
with once someone has signed the code.
So we can't go back in time. Oh, okay.
But, um, but we, we can still do, uh, as, as Don said,
we've still got the power to investigate now.
And we are, we've, we've got a number of investigations,
a number of complaints,
and we are certainly, um, holding the hands
of the sector as we go. For sure.
To, to clarify Peter, too, we, we,
so we we're receiving on, on,
on average one complaint day in scope.
Um, the ones that out are out of scope, for example,
may be an employment dispute where the law says
that must be dealt with by the employment court, um,
employment relations authority.
So there are not everything that's happening in the world
of integrity and sport and recreation comes to us
because it might be employment related, might,
as you rightly say, it might be police related.
It might be SFO related.
Um, so our ambit is sort of sits in a fairly clear box.
Okay. I'm a bit confused now.
Um, so the, these complaints
received already are just from scouts?
No, no, no, No. Sorry. No.
They, they cover 70 different organizations.
Our complaints so far,
we've had from 70 different organizations
7 0, 7 0, 7 0.
Yep. Yep. Um, so when we talk about scouts
and eSports, they're the only ones at the moment
who can make complaints about breaches of the code.
'cause they're the only ones who've signed the
code right at the moment.
So, so if you, the, the ones we've had to date,
because up until June 30,
we didn't have anyone signing the code.
So the ones that this, this committee's, um, here
to discuss, they're all, um, non code complaints Okay.
That, that we've been dealing with.
And, and just to, to pick up your last question as well,
we have, uh, good relationships
and in some cases, um, memorandum understanding with
agencies such as Sport New Zealand police in development
with, uh, serious port office, TAB,
and others, so that we can share that information.
Oh, great. And, and I think it's fair to say that if,
if it does tend to touch us, we hear about it.
So, but that's encouraging. Very
Good. Thank you. Supplemental
on that though, those 70
Yes. Um,
Sectors that you've had complaints from, is,
is there a commonality sort of groupings in terms
of the complaints that are
coming through that you've noticing?
Yeah, I, I, I've got the statistics here.
They, um, uh, perhaps sadly, but,
but perhaps not unexpectedly, the, um, majority
of complainants are female and,
and relate to, um, allegations
against females, against women.
Um, interestingly, uh, the majority of our complaints,
approximately 65% are out of community community sport.
35% are more on that high performance, uh, area.
And far and away the, the largest, uh, area
of complaints are in that participant protection.
So bullying, um, abuse, sexual misconduct, far
and away probably taking up, um, just over half
of all complaints come in with that type of theme, sadly.
Right. And how, how many complaints in total,
How many, Sorry, complaints in total?
Complaints in total? Uh, 283 in, uh, last year.
Okay. What's, what, Sorry. Oh,
I actually gonna ask just off there.
Yeah. Like, so what, what does the
participation gimme an example
Of participation Yeah.
Of that, of that particular 280, you know.
Um, So any, an example may be at
that the community level, a uh,
a 13-year-old swimmer who feels very uncomfortable about
how their coach is talking to her.
Uh, and, um, either raises it with a friend
or raises it with a parent
who rings our hotline and says, what do I do?
Um, that would be a, a standard type of complaint.
What, do you have any ethnicity stats
and what, um, reflections do you make on those
In terms of the complaints?
Uh, we collect them. I don't have them here.
We can get back to you on those. Are
There any themes that strike you that you know,
that have struck you that you can share now?
Um, what I can say is through the establishment phase,
we did a lot of consultation, uh, in the community, um,
through, uh, with Maori and Pacifica.
And, uh, racism was particularly prevalent.
Um, and that, that has, uh, informed a lot
of the services we provide.
We have, um, culturally
appropriate services for that reason.
And, and, and that we have an example at the moment
where we're working with, um, a Tik based organization
to support that, but it's not only going to be limited
to al Maori, uh, we have people we can work with
around all ethnicities as well.
So, um, very determined
and it says in our legislation, we need to be able
to respond to, and we do it anyway
'cause it's the right thing, uh, um, the rights
and obligations in, in terms of Maori.
So something we, we have woven into our, our services.
Cool. I would be interested in that, those details.
Yes. And just up on, on that stuff.
Um, so when you, when you deal with a complaint
and you reach resolution, how do you know
that it's been successful?
Like, you know, what sort of ongoing monitoring
or feedback do you get?
I mean, I, I think the, the answer to that is
that if there is resolution,
unless there is as part of that
and agreed to check in, we will step away.
And, and that's simply a resource related issue.
So, uh, if, if in the example we talked about,
if there's some education given to the coach
and, um, parents who are made clear that if, you know,
there's a continuation or the, or the,
or the youth is made clear,
there's a continuation, raise it.
I don't believe we would've the resources
to keep going back.
Uh, is everything fine? Is everything fine?
Is everything fine? We just don't, I mean,
we are a very small organization Yeah.
Dealing with a massive sector. Yeah.
Um, but we would make sure there is
that continual ability to come back to us.
Yeah. But you would also, I imagine,
be monitoring if there was a pattern of repeat offending.
Oh, absolutely. Yeah.
So you would be keeping an eye on that. Yeah.
And that also we have that ability too for our own, um,
as I said, public interest investigation.
So if we started to see
that we would absolutely have the ability to go back to
that sport and say we are concerned, um,
and, uh, into our own process. Good.
A supplement on that, I think you've largely answered
it, but just to double check.
So that in terms of the complaints
and dispute to this that you have, is that, is
that why in your, uh, performance reports for your report,
the response times to the complaint as opposed
to resolution of the complaint?
Yeah,
So that's what we need to get
better at developing this year.
Uh, I mean, in our first year it was just get it
established, um,
and we totally accept that we now need to start, you know,
we're established or underway.
How are we monitoring our response times?
Are we, are we up to speed? Are we improving?
Um, so that's very much a key part of our work this year.
Okay. Thanks Helen. Hi.
We have been, we've just been doing stalking legislation.
Mm-hmm. And obviously there's a, um, an awareness, um,
that a lot of these, um, complaints people are afraid
of continuing through it.
Is this a, a process where there's any room for not
complaints where you can see a pattern?
Or does everybody get natural justice and
therefore people making a complaint are going to be, uh,
fearful perhaps of making that complaint?
I'm not saying you shouldn't do that,
but what's the, what's the ground rules in terms
of seeing those patterns of behavior, um, given
that you might get a young swimmer
who doesn't necessarily want to say that the coach
is doing this or they're in competitive situation?
Yeah, again, a really good question.
The, i I think it's probably a little early to say.
Yeah, I, I think we are flexible enough to both look
after the participant and deal with the issue,
but also have sufficient flexibility in our legislation
to actually go to the sport
and say, we have a much bigger,
we are seeing a much broader issue here.
Right. And indeed, we've already done that at a,
at a high level with one sport, um, you know,
had discussions with the board about trends
that we aren't overly delighted about.
Um, so, uh, I think we have the flexibility to do that.
And you might have more flexibility than
many other agencies.
A hundred percent because we are not dealing at,
generally not dealing with crime.
We're dealing at that level below. Yeah.
So I think that's exactly right. Okay. Thanks.
I just add, oh, sorry.
Just our legislation also includes, um, pause
around if you discrimination.
So if someone is being discriminated against
for making a complaint, uh,
and they think it's affecting their selection
or the way they're treated, uh, similar
to the protected disclosures that we have, similar kind
of wording in our legislation as an extra protection
and also with the code, one
of the minimum standards is about reporting matters
of serious concern to us,
even if the sport are dealing with it themselves.
So we do get that overall sort of helicopter view,
if you like, of, of what's coming in. We do,
Yeah. Supplementary more.
Yeah. I'm just, um, wondering
About the sensitivity of some of the information
that you are receiving and, and the need to protect that.
But I also wonder is there, um, potential in the,
say if someone was thinking about employing a new coach
or whatever, can they come to you
and say, are there any red flags?
Are you able to alert them to anything
that you may have dealt with?
Um, the appropriate, sorry, the appropriate, uh,
I guess steps, and this won't be surprising to many of you,
is, is around obviously police betting your normal
employment checks and references and that sort of thing,
but you pointed out that we, we can't, uh, give a,
a green tick for prospective coach or, or employee.
However, I think over time, once we've built up some of
that intelligence and insights, um,
we can probably take more proactive steps
around making sure things are in place in, in, in the sector
so that, uh, sports are much better at, um,
at protecting their participants.
We did look at, um, when we were setting up the,
the commission whether we could effectively have some sort
of central agency, if you like, for protection
of participants, but there were so many privacy law, uh,
other implications of that.
Um, one thing we are really pleased about though is
that our, if you adopt the code, uh, you adopt our child
safeguarding, uh, policies which
require, for example, vetting.
So, uh, if you're going to actually say, um, yes, um,
squash New Zealand as part of our, uh, code,
then every squash coach will need to be vetted
before they take on that role. Yeah. But,
But police vetting is quite different
to the complaints that you are receiving. Yeah, yeah.
It's not the panacea. I totally accept that. No,
It's, it's a balance Motivat.
Mm. Sorry. In, in the same vein, um, Don,
which is you just said, um, we're not dealing with crime
and, but one might be how do you,
how do you assess, what's your threshold of, you know,
when would be the point at which you, you might say to
who somebody that's in this, um, complaints proceedings, um,
it might be time to go there. Do you
Hand that one to the former police officer?
Yes. Great. Straight. No, uh, really good
and important question.
As Don said, we, we deal in the sub criminal,
but we've got some really experienced, uh, some police
and certainly some legal expertise
who can very quickly recognize when,
when it's something hits a criminal threshold
and some really good relationships, uh,
and police in particular, DIA, uh, there,
there are some others and, and who we can talk to directly
to decide what to do with it.
And we've, I think if I had in front of me, I
referred about 40 cases, not, not just to police mm-hmm.
But to other agencies. There are,
they're listed in our legislation.
You question Scott, Uh, on, on doping Christian.
'cause I see you've picked up the
anti-doping responsibilities.
Yes. Mm-hmm. Um, how are you, how are you managing that?
What's the, what's the ability to, uh, keep on doing that,
which is, you know, as we know, it's, it's a big issue.
Mm. And a lot to manage.
Yeah. I, I, I've been really delighted if it's, uh,
actually very proud of the fact that we've brought, um,
almost two entities together.
Um, one, one burgeoning in terms of integrity,
integrity unit and, and, and,
and our drug free sport New Zealand brought them together
and I think very quickly created a really cohesive team.
Um, and, and I applaud my CEO
for the work she's done in that regard.
The, I I've not received any suggestion from anyone in our
sporting community that that's led to a lack
of focus on anti-doping.
We're still doing must do the statutory
number of tests that were required.
We're still doing the education that's required.
We are looking to refine that education so
that we get the chance to educate an integrity
and an, an anti-doping at the same time,
or often in the same opportunity, or, or, or separate.
We're just working through how we best do that.
But, um, we're still hugely committed to, to, um, catching
as many, well, our focus isn't on catching the cheeks.
Our focus is on educating people not to dope,
but obviously we need to catch dopes as well.
Uh, and, um, yeah,
I'm really confident we haven't
stepped away from that at all.
Mm-hmm. So I was really,
really interested in anti-doping around the costs,
because the commission obviously do your testing
and you're a user pay.
So I'd be interested on what those tests
actually do cost the commission or as a body user pace.
But my question, what I then wanted to go to is,
we've got a very high profile boxer mm-hmm.
Who at the moment is under a cloud
and nobody knows the result of that.
But when we do, you step into a situation like that
because integrity of boxing becomes, uh,
people are looking at that, what, what's happening there?
Can you step into that situation, even though
that's happening somewhere offshore?
The answer to the second question is simply no.
Um, that professional boxing does its own, uh,
testing under its own system.
Mm-hmm. Um, the box in New Zealand have signed our sports
anti-doping rules, but that's more at the
amateur community level.
If you're a professional boxer,
you are in the world of professional box.
And we have no influence over that, unfortunately.
Uh, in terms of user page, yeah.
Do you wanna explain? Sure. Um,
I can, um, so we've got about 30 organizations who, uh,
get user pay services from us.
And they are, um, sports like, um, New Zealand, rugby's, one
of them, um, and other international bodies
and other anti-doping organizations around the world.
But that's run outta cost neutral,
um, on a cost neutral basis.
And, and I think the total cost might even be in the annual
report, but I won't take it out yet.
We will definitely come back to you on that.
But they, they are costs that, um, we, we've sort
of built a model whereby
what we charge reflects not only the, the cost of the test,
but some of the human resource involved in collecting it.
'cause we use our, our sample collection personnel
and we have a, we can only use, um,
for example, a lab in Sydney.
Uh, 'cause that's a wider accredited lab.
There isn't one in New Zealand.
So we're now send our samples to Sydney, uh, most
of the time in some cases Europe
Ary.
Um, how many of the six violations involved
intentional vaping?
There were six we had this year.
Um, I'd have to think, I think most
of 'em were substances of abuse.
Um, so whether
or not you describe those as intentional, I mean, I,
I guess everything, if it's a substance of abuse, it's going
to be usually in a taken, intentionally be it to cocaine,
cannabis, um, and some of the other ones as well.
But because the anti-doping regime is strict liability,
so if it's in your system and you are responsible for it,
um, that, that assumes everything is intentional.
But I know that's not, that's
not strictly what you're asking.
Mm-hmm. So it's more about, was I trying to cheat? Yeah.
Uh, and I would say that the substances of abuse, um,
if you look at each decision that sets out in the decision,
usually whether or not there's a, the level is, um, enough
that it would be performance enhancing
or the sport itself would make that
substance performance enhancing and whether
or not it was in or out of competition.
And were there any cases that were clearly
performance enhancing levels?
Um, there were, there were a couple.
I, I can come back to you on that.
Um, but, uh,
but most of 'em were dealt with quite early on
and that the, the athlete was able to admit
that and carry on. New question, Laura.
Oh. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you guys for coming along.
Um, my questions about the Incorporated Societies Act going
through the changes, so sorry about my list
that comes into effect in 2026.
Yes. Um, I know that there's quite a lot of crossover
between your code
and some of the things that I've gotta now do
in the new constitutions.
Have you done any work together and thought about this?
Because if somebody has to update their constitutions,
particularly all our small clubs, um, that's an opportunity
for your code or, you know, I'm just
wondering if there has been any sort of given to that.
Yeah, again, great question.
Um, so we have done a, a great deal of work with, um,
the sector to try to get them to look
to tweak when they're, when they're, when they're, uh,
amending their constitution to, to align
with the new incorporated societies act
to also make sure if they have to mm-hmm.
Um, that they provide jurisdiction to the commission.
Um, so not, not every sport that looks
to adopt the code will need
to change their constitution, but some will.
Yeah. Uh, and yes, the, the answer to the question is yes,
we are very much good to do.
So at the same time, the, the challenge is that some sports,
uh, have already have already sort of,
I wouldn't say jumped the gun, but
they've been very proactive.
They've done the constitutions already.
Um, and, uh, that is they then face
our request in a year or two to do, yeah.
Do another change. I think that's part of your problem,
I think with the adoption.
Correct. It's a lot of retake small club to be doing. Yeah.
Yeah. We did work with Sport New Zealand, uh, to come up
with some wording that sports could use.
Uh, and, and through the work
that Sport New Zealand is doing to support the sector, we,
uh, joined them with that to make sure
that people have everything they need.
New question. Yeah.
This is, um, back to the complaints process,
and there's a few, so I'll just ask them all.
Go for it. So why do you think, um,
what do you think explains the high proportion
of complaints from grassroots, um, level?
Uh, why we're 45 deemed out scope,
and how long on average does it take to resolve a complaint?
Um, uh, uh, in terms of the grassroots
and high performance, I think we,
we have always anticipate anticipated roughly a 70 30 split.
Um, and so we are largely, uh, that
that's been delivered roughly at the moment.
Um, uh, why, why?
Because, um,
there's an awful lot more people playing community sport
than high performance sport, um, is the simple answer.
And, um, and frankly, uh, I think
with exceptions, a lot of,
there's a lot more education going into high performance
than there isn't a community around what is
and is an acceptable.
Um, so, uh, I, I think in reality, a wrongdoing level,
it's probably more like 90 10,
but, um, simply on, on weight of numbers.
Um, and we think if we receive significant growth
and complaints over time, we suspect it'll be mainly out
of community is, and community comes more
and more aware of, of our existence
and their right to come to us.
Um, complaints that are outta scope,
um, could be employment.
It could simply be that it's not a threat to integrity as,
as the act is sets itself out.
Um, so, uh, it might be a complaint about a constitution,
it might be a complaint about selection,
it might be a complaint about something, um,
that is just something outside of what we can deal with.
And we might have to tend that back to, um, the sport.
Uh, yeah, simple answer. Sorry. And the third question was
How much average time it takes to resolve the case?
That's a little bit of a piece of string,
but, um, I guess what I could say is, as you can see,
hopefully in our, in our annual report,
the numbers we have resolved are about 165.
Um, and then if you include those 45 out of scope,
that's 200 odd, um, that can be a mediation,
which can take a little bit more time.
We've, we've done 15 mediations, 59
through early facilitation, that can be a matter of weeks.
Uh, and then we also have used some reminder
of obligation letters, which simply do that.
They set out a reminder of someone's obligation or,
or organization's obligation.
Uh, and often that is all that's required
and people are happy with that.
So, um, the fact that we've still got, um, active 73 from,
from that year, I guess that means those are still tracking,
uh, a small number of those are investigations.
And so it, it's probably difficult to say how,
what the average time is,
but back to the, um, performance measures, I think
that's something we will look at to try
and in a meaningful way, give ourselves some,
some good performance measures
to make sure that they are timely.
There's no doubt investigations are the slowest part, so
it's really difficult to do them quickly, um,
just from a natural justice perspective.
Um, but we will, by this time next year,
have some really good stats in
That.
Something else, I'm curious,
how are you doing those mediations?
Are you following the, are you using the same people?
Are you following the three systems that Don
and I would've worked with a lot of the time?
Or are you, have you reinvented the system?
Are you using people from the field?
We are, um, uh, trying
to follow a best practice mediation model that is probably,
dare I say, not the system you
and I are, it might be a lot that I would hope so.
Um, uh, it's, I mean, everything we do is, has
to be very much around the participant, participant safety.
So it's creating a safe environment.
It's not, dare I say, horse trading.
This is about identifying the issue, coming up
with a solution where the parties can move
forward constructively together.
It's, it's certainly not, uh, let's reach a solution
for our compromise and move on with life. So
Very different outcome that you're looking for really.
We, we we're looking for people
to walk away feeling safe. Yeah.
No, yeah. It's not pushing.
Yeah. And just following on on that, like,
can you just paint us the picture of where this,
because it's a massive undertaking,
especially when you're talking about the
education and the culture change.
So paint us the picture of what
that looks like in terms of the workforce.
Um, have you created a workforce, uh, codes responsible
for educating the clubs?
Or have you got this mobile team of amazing people
who are gonna work the country?
What does delivery look like?
All of that? Um, I, how much time we've got there,
it's, you know, all of that, right?
From the awareness raising, we've got online, uh, offerings.
We have educators who go and educate people.
We've got a, um, an integrity, uh, relationship team
who work with specific sports to step them
through not only the adoption process,
but also for those sports who aren't yet adopting or, or,
or just haven't, um, what, what they need in order
to raise their awareness and, and their safety.
Um, we have the, back to the mediation question,
an internal mediation team
that have got some trauma informed skills
and some, um, you know,
the appropriate skills you need when dealing with children.
And equally from the investigation's perspective,
which might be why they're better than, than
what you're used to is, um, because they're in house
and a little bit more, uh, managed closely.
So, uh, and then the other part of the workforce is our, um,
obviously we have a field team
who do our anti-doping collections as well, um,
and supported by what you might imagine in any other agency.
But I, I think fair to say, we, we scope, we've scoped it
to a point where we want to be able to grow naturally
and as, as code adoption increase and,
and complaints increase.
So we can add to that, uh, without compromising our service.
Um, but yeah, uh, someone mentioned
before it's, I think it's holding the hand
and we've been very, very clear with organizations
that this is what we are funded to do now.
So yeah, there is a bit of work there, but,
but we are the first port of call.
Just ring us. Um, that's what we are funded to do.
We'll, we'll help as much as we can,
and that also helps us know
what we need from a workforce perspective.
Slightly different question, but, uh, what, uh,
what do you sort of benefit that you expect
to get from your contributional participation in the
world anti-doping code?
What changed? So what changes do we expect? Sorry. Well,
What benefits do you anticipate, um, from your, you know,
engagement and involvement in the world? Anti-doping code?
The, the, the, our hope is that the,
there'll be another iteration of the code.
Small, small tweaks will come out shortly.
Uh, and then there is a significant rewrite of the code,
which Rebecca is part of a team that's, that's, uh, helping
to contribute to, we are very keen on the code moving
to a greater sense of proportionality, um,
particularly when it comes to, uh, the substance
of abuse, which aren't massively,
if at all, performance enhancing.
So it's quite, it's a very relevant question.
We spend a lot of our time in, in the world
of anti-doping dealing with marijuana and cocaine abuse.
Um, why, because the code requires us to, uh, there's no,
there's no, um, there's no flexibility in, in, in, in
how we deal with those matters.
Um, we are really keen to see a code
that has a little bit more flexibility
and proportionality in that, in that regard, um, so
that we can focus more of our resources on the real, the,
the, the true anti, uh, true doping, um,
performance enhancing area.
Um, that's our main hope.
Yeah. And being part of a harmonized anti-doping system,
uh, around the world where theoretically run follows the
same rules, um, and it's really well known by athletes
and competitors, what the standards are.
Right. Um, maybe one,
one last collect tells me we're at time.
Well, I mean, I think that's a really important point.
So essentially you're saying anti-doping is about
performance enhancing drugs, so you'd rather do that,
be looking at that rather than the policing role of
recreational drug, which is more
of a health issue. Is that, is that correct?
That's fear. Uh, having said that, there's still a bit
of gray as to whether some of those,
those drugs can be performance enhancing
in certain circumstances.
So, uh, with, with that caveat,
yes, I agree with your question.
Yeah. There, there's three reasons why something's on the
prohibited list, and one is it's performance enhancing.
One is it, um, it could interfere with the health
of the athlete or their, their competitors.
And the other one is that it's against the spirit of sport.
So, uh, two of those three things need to be present
for something to be on the prohibited list.
So it can be a wide net. Right.
Well, thank you for, uh, both very much
for coming in. Thank you. Thank,
Thank you, your time. Yes.
Afternoon.
Well, good afternoon and welcome to the social
service and Community Select committee.
Thank you. So thank you for being here this afternoon.
If you could please introduce yourselves, uh, more
to the people watching online, but also to the committee.
And, uh, then make some opening remarks.
And after that we'll make your questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, au our Raylan castle,
our group Chief Executive of of Sport New Zealand.
Thank you.
Uh, Kira, uh, Dwayne Kale acting, uh,
chair of Sport New Zealand.
We've also got, uh, Julie Morrison, uh, who's, um, head
of strategy, uh, policy and investment.
And, uh, Sally Kane, who's head of, um, corporate affairs,
um, corporate services. Thank you. Great. Thank
You. Welcome.
Very good. So I just would like
to make some opening remarks, if that's okay, please.
Thank you. Uh, so it has been, um, a big year
for the Sport New Zealand group, uh,
and we continue to deliver on our strategic priorities.
Uh, and we're starting to see some really positive signs,
uh, particularly in participation levels
amongst our tamari longhi.
For Tahi Secondary School, uh,
sport participation is rebounding towards pre
COVID-19 levels.
Uh, we attribute this to targeted investments
and the fantastic work of all the people that we work
with across our sector.
Active, uh,
is now in its second year supporting 50 secondary schools
in ura.
Uh, we are seeing really positive signs, uh,
from the evaluation with increased opportunities
to be active, uh, a four point half percent reduction in,
uh, the tahi that are less active.
And a third of schools are now seeing at least 50% of the
AHI active, uh, during their school day.
Our place-based approach, uh, continues to grow.
Uh, we've identified 92 geographic priority communities, um,
and are working with regional sports trusts, uh,
and national agencies such as police corrections,
and to support these locally led
and community led solutions.
This approach helps, um, the fund that to mana, uh,
more purposefully into communities experiencing high
levels of deprivation.
So we are actually getting to the ground.
Uh, we launched the Unpro campaign to inspire young women
to be active without pressure to perform.
Uh, and that campaign has been very well received, uh,
with positive shifts in participation for these young women,
uh, and multiple.
It was also, um, won multiple public sector
and industry awards,
although we we're more interested than the, the success
of the woman being physically active,
young woman than we are, the awards we lead the development
of the 2025
to 2030 sport diplomacy strategy across government effort
involving nine separate agencies.
The strategy bids on recent diplomatic milestones builds on
rather recent diplomatic milestones,
including the Prime Minister's trade mission in India in
March, 2025, when New Zealand
and India signed a sports memorandum of Corporation
and Minister Bishop's recent visit to Chicago
to support a wraparound New Zealand Inc.
Activations, uh, that's
where the played the strategy is already delivering value
from MFA funded initiatives in the Pacific, uh,
to formal corporation with India
and activations in the US alongside NZTE and MFA
and independent Rapid review is also completed during 24 25,
and it's focused on sport.
New Zealand's, um, efficiency
and effectiveness benchmarking confirmed we are operating
efficiently, particularly in back office functions.
The most significant change arriving from the review, uh,
arising from the review was the decision
to shift strategic policy function
to the Ministry of Culture and Heritage.
Uh, this, uh, took place, uh, successfully in October.
We've embedded a value
for money framework into program evaluation.
Uh, this tracks delivery participation experience
and sustainability alongside financial metrics
and qualitative measures like community impact
and cultural responsiveness.
Paris 2024 was a standout moment for New Zealand.
Uh, we saw New Zealand athletes, uh,
deliver the most successful Olympic games in our history,
uh, with over 20 medals and 10 golds.
And what I would say is it was the winning, uh,
was important actually, the way New Zealand went about, uh,
its performances there, uh, was what I got the most, uh,
constructive feedback on high performance sport.
New Zealand's Gold Mine innovation program contributed to 16
of these medals, including innovations like track
cycling, skin suits.
So that concludes my comments,
and we are very happy to take any questions. Thank you.
There's Christian Mori.
Um, thank you very much.
Um, my question is around, um,
what we call social investment.
So do you do any measuring about the social, um,
value that's attributable to being in sport in New Zealand?
Uh, we do.
Uh, so we have a, uh, whole monitoring, evaluation
and learning program, which, uh, is, uh, based
around all of those things.
So, uh, we are getting a return on investment
for the actual dollars we are spending.
Mm-hmm. Um, and how effective is it being on the ground?
And then on the social, um, return piece?
Um, the mo the, it's a little bit a couple
of years old now probably,
but there was, uh, it was a $2
oh 1 2, 0 4, 2 12, 2 0 4 20, um,
return on investment against a social impact perspective.
So that is actually measured as well. Great.
Thank you. Uh, supplemental on that, um,
in my lecturer, they have the New Zealand Gulf Open, um,
every year do do, like,
they do their own analysis obviously on that,
but is that something that Sports
New Zealand considers as well?
And sort of the, the broader impact on New Zealand's global
BR global brand visibility in other markets, et cetera?
Uh, from our perspective, that largely sits with the, uh,
work that we do with mb.
So MB and their major events process, they ask us to, um,
input into that process
and decision making to understand whether we think
that's an event that adds value back into our strategy.
But largely the decision
to invest actually sits with MB itself.
Well, I might take the opportunity
to do one more supplementary and plug in my region just, um,
is, is Alice Robinson just one another goal is my, one
of my constituents when she's at home, uh,
which makes her the most successful, uh, you know,
New Zealand skier outside of non European
and non-American country.
Um, but so that's a pretty exceptional outcome.
But is that, is the work that you do
with like the organization like Snow Sports, New Zealand,
et cetera, to help
or relationships to support that kind of, um,
I guess success that we can have some
of athletes really punch outta the park?
Yes. So Snow Sports is one of the, uh,
five top investment partners, uh,
from High Performance Sport New Zealand.
So we have, um, they call podium sports.
So they separate out
because they have the biggest chance
of actually being successful.
Uh, and uh, in a, in a winter Olympic context,
they're now four months away from going
to the Winter Olympics, which will be in Milano, Corina.
Um, Alice Robinson is certainly someone that is
identified into that investment process.
So she is one of like Zoe Sadowski
and, uh, Luca Harrington, uh, and the like, uh,
and in talking to the CEO
of Snow Sports New Zealand this morning when I texted him
to say congratulations on Alice, his performance, uh,
he came back to me and said to put that in a rugby context
that is like the all black spa in South Africa, 50
to N So she won that race for over a second.
So that is just like unheard of.
Uh, so we're very confident in the preparation
and this is a really crucial time for those athletes
as they prefer prepare to go
to the Winter Olympics in four months time. Gotcha.
Reference. Sure. If you'd like to,
Um, just in addition to that,
you're saying about the investment in the sport, um,
while this doesn't affect Alice directly,
but the other snow sport athletes
and some of those technical designs
and jumps, there's been an investment which we've supported
as well as the local community
and snow sports in a dry slope.
And again, the, the CE of Snow sports will tell you
that this is a game changer.
Is that the one in ca? Correct.
Have a ca Supple.
Okay. So mine's almost the blend of these two, right?
So what I wanna know is, uh, we've got a whole lot
of neurodivergent children, we've got a whole lot
of issues when we've actually in this committee.
We've heard that, um, sport with young children
is a lot more effective value money than, uh, boot camps.
It's like huge. Um, how are you, uh, I'm interested,
I'm just gonna throw in weird one in,
but I'm interested in yoga in schools
because I can see the Indian community,
it's an engagement point.
You talked about that, that there's a whole lot of, um,
calming influences
and strategy in that, given how many things were out there.
How do you make the decision about where you are going
to balance things and prioritize?
How does that happen given you talked about the investment,
the impact lab kind of stuff.
How are you making those decisions?
Yeah, so we, uh, do take those things in consideration
as part of our core strategy.
Disability is specifically called out,
and that's not just physical disability, it's also
identifying the neurodiverse elements of, uh,
those, um, areas.
Uh, and we have, uh, just invested 2.1,
2.2 in the disability, uh,
specifically in additional investment into that space for,
um, areas that are actually specifically, uh, looking
at all parts of disability,
but including, um, some of those neurodiverse.
Uh, we also have the two Manu fund, which is $16 million
that goes invested through the regional sports trust.
Uh, and the expectation from us,
or the guidelines, if you like from that, is
that they invest in two programs that are supporting Maori
and Pacifica, um, uh, young people
with a disability and also women and girls.
So we're seeing a much greater uplift in the number
of young people with a disability having opportunities
to engage specifically since Rugby's a good example
of it specifically.
So since rugby, um, rugby,
but using it for people, young people that are neurodiverse
to have an opportunity to actually understand
what playing sports. I guess my
Question's more like how do you balance,
you've got all those things going on.
I do choose how are you choosing when all
of those are virtuous things?
Yep. But they're pulling a very different direction.
They are. And we have a, uh, investment, uh, framework
that we work really closely to, to make sure that
that's investing against all
of the different elements of our strategy.
Uh, because we, we can't have a situation
where we find all our, ourselves were only in disability,
for example, or wasn't.
Um, we're ignoring the parts
of our strategy about locally led, so in the community where
with the geographic priority community.
So that's a complex investment model, uh,
that makes sure there's equity across all
of those different elements within the strategy.
Scott, so I'm,
I'm pleased you mentioned the term manawa fund
because in your 25 26,
you've got a specific policy initiative
to reduce the crown funding for, for that fund.
Um, and that to aims to get the ranta
who might have barriers engaged in sport.
Why was that seen, um, seen as not so important
or less worthy than other
other sport activities under other sport funding?
So from a sport, New Zealand point of view,
there's only three areas that we have that are crown funded.
So we have our core appropriation,
which helps fund the running of Sport New Zealand.
Uh, we have our Healthy active Learning initiative,
which is a 900, uh, schools in Kura across the country.
And then we have two mana, which is the fund that invests,
as you just rightly said about into that area.
Uh, and so we have to take it.
We've been asked to make a cut.
We have to deliver those cuts, uh, against those,
um, different elements.
Where we are fortunate, um, unlike some other agencies, is
that we do have a little bit more flexibility
because we receive some lotto funding
and that lotto funding, uh, that we have allows us
to fill up and make sure that we can continue to deliver
that $16 million a year.
The slight challenge, of course, is
that the appropriation disappears forever, um,
and the, the lotto, uh, fund is uncertain.
So whilst we've been able to do that in the last 12 months
and the, um, reductions that we have been asked
to do going forward, uh, we are likely
to be able to fill those.
Um, but it is, there will come a time
where we will have to make choices
We push on.
I just wanna acknowledge mahi that the RSOs, well first
of all, Koto, um, acknowledge the mahi that the RSOs do,
getting into some of our most isolated, um, communities.
And I note that you want, it's great to hear
rebounding still not quite at the
levels we want them to be at.
And, um, you wanna prioritize getting into 92 communities
of geographic priority.
Given what you've just said about it is great about the
lottery funding, but it still doesn't take you back up to
the financial settings you were at.
So how are you gonna achieve this
and your other strategic priorities with less money?
Uh, so we've worked really hard, uh,
to reduce any back office costs.
So we may found the savings in the back office
to make sure there was no impact in the, um, investments
that we make directly.
Uh, those investments are locked in for four year cycles,
so, uh, we give ourselves a little bit of wiggle room
to make sure we've made those commitments
and we don't have to back off.
Um, and we've been able to commit to those either
because of the savings we've made in back office or
because of the lotto funding that we,
additional lotto funding that we've received.
Can you give us some details of the back office
Cuts? Uh,
so we, we reduced head count, um,
by about, uh, seven or eight people.
Uh, we made some savings on our operational costs, uh,
so we had some additional, uh, investment, uh,
that was designed to help support, uh,
more flexibly if you like.
We decided that it was best not to have that flexibility
and actually invested into
what we had guaranteed and committed
Dr. Scott.
Yeah, thank you. So, um, the budget 25 is,
shows a decrease in spending for community sport programs,
but high performance sport has got, um,
74 million under this budget.
So why is there that marked difference in spending?
I mean, I know you have to make choices,
but that seems like a big difference.
So the total spend we make, uh, for, um, sport New Zealand
as a whole, so the sport New Zealand community is a little
over 120 million,
and high performance is 74, 72 to seven 4 million.
That is because the whole appropriation, uh,
for high performance for New Zealand, um,
comes from directly from government.
And the sport New Zealand investment is made up
of government appropriation and lotto.
So actually the spend is greater in community.
Okay. Okay. So we've also got a decline in sports
involvement clearly for both youth and adults.
How's the budget gonna address that?
How are we gonna get more people active and involved?
Well, that's what we spend every
waking moment thinking about.
That is the reality of, of where the strategy is designed.
And I think we, uh,
because of the focus of, um, areas of deprivation, uh,
we know that funding is challenging.
We know that there's families
that are finding it really difficult at the moment to, um,
be able to, um, actually have the opportunity to, um,
either, you know, work, look after their family
and pay fees and the like.
So that's the work that the regional sports Trust are doing,
um, to make sure that they're identifying those areas
of most need geographic priority communities
is where the focus is.
So we've got communities that are capable
of looking after themselves.
They tend more to do that now,
and we focus that investment largely on the young people in
this country that are missing out, um,
using physical activity in that positive way.
What we're seeing is some increased return to school numbers
because we are, um, though the positive,
positive opportunity of healthy active learning
and using physical education in those environments is really
positive and kids look forward to it.
So it's positive from a school point of view.
Uh, we're also working directly with police, uh, with some
of the funding, um, where they've got significant
recidivism, uh, to actually use some of those elements
of funding, uh, for, um, helping police actually fund
and pay for, uh, registrations into sports, um, to give
that young person a chance to feel included and valued.
And they're actually seeing some really great results
and reduced recidivism because of that.
Just one really quick, quick, so are you noticing
that there are other social, social issues, social pressures
that are really limiting young people in particular,
your sport and into activities such, I don't know,
um, positive living crisis?
We know people are doing it tough and
and are you seeing some of that playing out at the moment?
Absolutely. Absolutely.
And, and that's a very real thing that we live with, um,
we all are living with.
Uh, but certainly that is why the strategy is focused, uh,
to, um, have an emphasis on people that are missing out.
Whether that's because of, um, uh, the environment
that they're living in or those identified communities
of women and girls, Maori and Pacifica
and young people with a disability.
Great. Um, so context and values.
Just wanna, and I just asked my mate over here, what's that?
What's that thing that, um, all of these young, old and
otherwise have thrown themselves into?
And it's that CrossFit thing, right?
And, and why I wanna, why I wanna raise this.
'cause it's about context. A so, um,
to have 302 individuals in a room
in a huge warehouse
and, uh, um, doing that thing over a number of hours, but,
but the, the reason that got them there was il
so there was a combination between the ability to, to
practice IL and this physical thingy.
I mean, it was a bit sweaty for my like, but anyway,
but it was, but it was the combination of those things
that are of value and what, and,
and the essence of that value, which was the real,
and then getting this number of people into a room,
and it's impressive and it just continues
to grow across the tu and then it turns my mind to haka
and those same spaces where, again, this is about context
for Maori, uh, nearly regardless of age.
So I, I, I wanna, why do I, I wanna raise this as a
what do you see and how, and, um, because that's what I see
and every year and every six months just up at, um, um,
the far north we had a a right?
Just says, oh, okay, you just bring a few people together,
you know, we'll get like two 12 groups on stage,
brought 150 people on stage.
And it, it's just, it's impressive
because that's the value of what we, like, what we prefer,
and how we wanna spend our life,
not in a sport life, but getting busy.
Right. So yeah, all of that is context.
Um, how do you understand that?
How would you understand that?
Appreciate that in the context of sports nz?
'cause in the name it doesn't necessarily recognize it,
but you know, in the practice. Mm-hmm.
Uh, yes, I, I agree with you, everything you've just said.
Uh, we have a, within our, um, strategy, we have teki,
which is our Maori outcomes framework.
And that very much, uh, values the things you identified,
like the, and the other cultural elements
that are bringing whanau particularly together,
generational, intergenerational whanau.
Um, and that's how we're measuring success in that place.
So we have a number of different opportunities, investments
and levers that we can pull.
Um, and, uh, Kahaka is another great example.
We don't invest directly into kapaa, um, uh,
because it's taking care of us where,
but where it's happening in a more informal sense.
We are in and supportive, um, in those environments, uh,
the, um, to, um,
which is the Maori weaponry.
And, uh, we have a, um, agreement, um, agreement
with Maori weaponry.
Um, and, uh, they, uh, that's actually those traditional,
uh, use of, um, yeah,
Martial arts. Martial
arts, and that's the physical activity
that's bringing Maori back together in a way
that is actually including physical activity,
growing their connection
and using whanau gen, intergenerational whanau. Do
Do a few more questions. So bit
of a, okay.
Um, I just wanna thank you for answering our questions
and, and you seem very optimistic.
You seem to have a plan,
but are you concerned about the ability to actually deliver,
not just, um, as an organization,
but in these 92 communities with at least resource?
And what's the feedback you are getting from the
staff in your RSOs?
Well, sorry that it's difficult.
Um, but I think the great thing is we have a plan.
Uh, we know that regional sports trusts are deeply
integrated in their communities
and no one understands their communities better than
that, than they do.
So we are not sitting here in Wellington
going, you should be doing this.
All the different 14 was actually 18.
Regional sports trusts are delivering in a way across two,
our broad strategy,
but actually delivering specifically to the requirements
of their own communities.
And whilst yes, formalized sport has boots and uniforms
and all of that, um, and,
and there's cost to that, there's also lots of opportunities
for young people to, um, get four t-shirts out
and play a casual game of touch rugby.
Mm-hmm. Um, one of the initiatives,
which I know we're looking backwards, not forwards,
but you know, is around
what does a basketball hoop do when you actually just have a
basketball hoop and a ball and community can
get together and play with it?
So very low cost initiatives led by community, and
because it's led by community, it's actually supported,
looked after and protected by community.
So, um, I'm very, I am very hopeful.
I'm not suggesting it's not easy, uh,
but the research tells us
that young people understand the value of physical activity.
When you open that opportunity
for them, they grab it with both end.
Ooh, I'll come back. I'll come back. Okay. David, hopefully
They are, I'll follow up on your question.
Pushed her a little. Um, uh,
congratulations on your activated program.
And as Kushler was mentioning around that,
she called them RSOs RSTs.
I think that's fabulous. Um,
and I think it also, uh, lends itself to a number
of other things that Parliament are actually trying
to address at the moment, and, you know, relates to
how much time people are spending on
these and not being active.
We know activity and, um,
getting involved in social activities are absolutely vital
to try and address that kind
of mental health outcomes and so on.
So my question really is this, um, if you had the chance,
would you be able to provide some kind of, um, understanding
for us on how this addresses those other endemic issues
that we're facing in society at the moment?
Such as with our youth
and particularly our women with anxiety
and so on, we know that active play
and we know that activity in sports are absolutely
fundamental to addressing that sort of thing.
So my question is, how are those programs in your view,
prioritized and what could you do?
Uh, with more money, there's a lot more we could do.
Um, but we work really hard with the money that we've got,
uh, to try
and answer those very things that you've identified.
So while we have a vision of, um,
everybody active at the top, ultimately we've had
to invest against some very specific outcomes.
Uh, and that is working with our Ranga
and TAM of most need to make sure
that they're having those opportunities
that other young people are getting.
Um, there's interesting technology, uh, is an interesting,
it can be a blessing or a curse.
It can be really difficult when kids don't get off it
equally, where it's used in a positive way for step counts
and monitoring heart rates
and, you know, gamification of actually using some
of those elements can actually be seen as, as, as, um,
really, really positive environments.
There's no doubt the research speaks specifically
to the value of physical activity, uh, for young people
with mental health issues and the social cohesion
and connection that they have.
So that's where we have a specific investment.
But also much of the two UA funding is, is the organizations
and individual groups can apply,
and that would be something that we would, um,
that the regional sports trust would see as very favorable.
So, um, it is very targeted.
It's, we work as hard as we can to make sure
at some level we are supporting the RSTs and, um, NSOs
and active rec organizations at a holistic level,
but the actual investment itself is happening
to specifically address some of those issues. You've raised
Your question, Warren.
Sorry, may I just add Oh, sure. Sorry.
Um, glad you raised active as,
and it goes to the members' question here around how do we,
um, lift, um, the sustainability and increase the activity.
Um, the board recently spent some time in Mung East College,
um, where we got to witness firsthand, um,
what the students would were doing with that program.
And it, and it's probably fair to say that
while we had a framework of
what we thought the program would look like in the school,
the actual students had taken hold of it.
And that is the key to making
that sustainable ongoing success.
And the group leaders of the school, um,
that ran this program were the first to say
to us they were the least active in the school.
That, and, and I know that I can't give you a whole lot
of measurements around that, but anecdotally,
they are the stories that tell us
these programs are working.
What was, what was the key for
Them Getting engaged?
Um, well, they'll say to you that the, um, the head teacher,
um, told them, volunt told them, um,
and they recognized that they were the least non-active.
And there were a couple of the group there that
actually said to us, we are non-active, non-active.
And then they showed to us the programs that they would run
during school time
and they were getting, you know, the active kids
and the non-active kids.
But because they were the, I guess the lead of the, um, ones
that wouldn't typically fit, you know, the model of sport,
it just attracted others.
It is just supplement. I've gotta go to, well,
It can be a supple, It's what it is. Um,
I'm, I'm aware of some great work you guys did at the
governance level and organizationally
with how's that tracking?
That's not a s it's a founding document
up to, uh, I think
that in our context it's about better outcomes from Maori,
and that's where, um, sport can play, uh, play
to sport can play such an important role into the
description that we gave
before about using the other elements of Toyo and AU
and some of the traditional games, um, that Maori play.
Uh, bringing them together
and having that focus is really important.
So we talk to it through our Maori outcomes framework,
and that's how we measure the performance
and delivery back to Maori.
We also have TOMA board, um,
who are actively involved in the assessment
of those programs and making those recommendations
to the board for sign off,
but, you know, won't say the ultimate decision sits
with them, but the assessment
and the strong recommendation does,
and it's, you know, as you will understand, it's very rare
that you would go against thorough assessment
and great recommendations.
Is there, um, is there an acceptance
or a perspective from the organization
that those views can help?
Not just Maori outcomes?
Absolutely. Like I think, you know, some of that activity,
particularly where it's taken into school programs
and areas of high deprivation, um,
it's not targeted just to Maori.
Um, you know, it's,
it's going across the whole of the community.
So absolutely.
And we see some of those programs in those areas
of high deprivation, um,
that are attracting other community groups, you know, to,
you know, whether it be using the surf on the east coast,
you know, and surfing programs.
So absolutely it's wool.
It's designed as for Maori by as Maori.
Um, it is not limited, um,
in its offering question. Laura, thank
You very much. This is a brand
new question.
Um, and, and this is Laura's question,
but she's lost a voice, so I'm actually reading her
Text. Was it a good
party?
It's only, um, what direction
or advice have you given secondary school sports about
homeschool children being eligible for placing in events?
The background is that kids are, that are homeschooled,
but registered and using the curriculum
and testing via the ministry are currently allowed
to compete, but aren't allowed
to accept a placing award if they get first, second,
or third because they aren't at a physical
school, it's not really fair.
And kids that are, that are enrolled at Kura online
are allowed to place they petition parliament earlier this
year and it sits with the petitions committee currently.
Tom Rutherford accepted the petition
and we've both been trying to get to the bottom of it.
And it seems the hand break is with Sports New Zealand.
Uh, well, um, I can promise you the
hand break's not with Sport New Zealand.
Um, uh, we have done actually everything we possibly can.
So we agree with you. We would always be looking to try
and make sure that every young person in this country has an
opportunity, uh, to be physically active wherever possible.
The reality is that school sport New Zealand is its own, um,
uh, entity and it runs its own constitution.
Uh, so the, uh, legal battle that Hessa
and School Sport New Zealand ended up in, um,
our legal letters flying around.
We worked really hard to try and stop those legal letters
and we actually funded one of New Zealand's leading ex case
or, uh, judges who's a kc, uh, to help mediate
that situation to see if we could find a way
where they could find common ground.
Unfortunately, both parties chose not
to enter into that mediation.
Um, and, um, they have ultimately
through school Sport New Zealand, uh, put a vote
to their members who have decided to exclude, uh,
those young people that are hessa, uh, affiliated.
So, uh, we can't make them do anything.
Uh, all we can do is work hard to encourage them, uh,
to come back to the table and make their programs as, um,
their opportunities as inclusive as possible.
Can I attend this up?
Um, I don't know the makeup of Husa and the board,
but I'm presuming that there would be like principals from
schools and things like that, that might make that make up
that potential vote that went out, um,
which would be quite biased potentially
to the homeschool kids.
Um, and I don't know what your oversight is of them.
So we, we have no, no oversight,
But you fund them, I presume we,
We do, uh, make a, uh, a contribution to them,
but relative to the cost, our contribution is
that much compared to running their business that much.
So we aren't enough funder. We make a funding contribution.
Okay. I have to have to say, I've had complaints come
to me as well and, and, um, there's reports of kids
who have won mm-hmm.
And then been take taken off them and given to others
and the other kids said, no, no,
I don't want, I didn't want this.
Yeah. So it does, it does seem, this is about face,
frankly, the, I think a comment comment from
Me. Yeah.
I said we absolutely support everyone
being included in reality.
Uh, that was the case for all, um, homeschooled children.
Um, there was three levels
of competition at the highest level.
There was four children who were competing at that level.
It was made very clear to them that they could compete at
that level, but they wouldn't win a medal in
total of the he of kids.
Um, we think there's about 22 children, um,
that are actually, uh, were
included and now aren't included.
Again. On, on the last question to,
Um, my question has to do with, um,
how you see the public, um,
better understanding Sport New Zealand
and high Performance Sport New Zealand, uh,
particularly in terms of performance measures
that you've had, um, in the face of the
combined new strategies, uh, um,
and Mel, um, the, the MEL approach.
How, how do you see the public being able to, um,
see what you're doing, where you're going and,
and see the impact of Sport New Zealand on in
New Zealand for everyone?
Yeah, it's a, it's a good question.
I think it's a, it's a combination.
I think the hard measures
that we put in our annual report is the way for people
to actually understand what we said we'd do
and then what, how we performed against our commitments.
And, um, we have the letter
of expectations like agencies have from ministers who say
to us, here's the things that we expect you to do.
And we get measured against those,
and that's public documentation.
And then actually it's about the experience that, um,
young people have on the ground.
If we, uh, you know, have a driver
to see more young people have better positive, fun,
enjoyable experiences,
and we see participation numbers grow for Tamari, um,
that means that we are heading in the right direction
and the strategy is actually delivering, um,
in a more effective way.
And then if someone goes to our website,
'cause they want a coaching resource, um,
they find the coaching resource
and when they go to our website.
So there's lots of different touch points
for public in their own way to measure how we're performing.
Thank you. Well, thank you much
for your time this afternoon and appreciate the work.
Uh, thank you very much supporting sport
across all sectors of New Zealand.
Thanks.
Thank you.